A very important part of data preparation
is to assess the quality of your data.
We will look at some common data
quality issues in this lecture.
After this video, you will be able to
describe three data quality issues,
name three reasons for
poor data quality and
explain why data quality
issues need to be addressed.
Real world data is often very messy, so
it's a given fact that you will need
to clean your data by identifying and
addressing many issues that
affect the quality of your data.
Let's take a closer look at what
these data quality issues are.
A very common data quality
issue is missing data.
Recall that a sample in your dataset
typically contains several variables or
features like name, age and income.
For some samples, some of these
variables may not have a value.
These are referred to as
missing values in the data.
Missing values are also referred
to as N/A for not available.
So you will see N/A and
missing values used interchangeably.
You may have missing values in your data
if you have an optional field in your
data set.
For example, the field age is often
an optional field on a survey.
Also many people may choose not
to provide a response for income.
And so you will end up with missing values
for the variable income in your data set.
In some cases, a variable may
not be applicable to all cases.
For example, income may not be
applicable to people who are retired or
unemployed or to children.
So you will not have an entry for
income in all of your samples.
You can also have missing values, due to a
data collecting device that malfunctions,
a network problem that affects
how the data was transmitted, or
something else that goes wrong during
the data collection process itself, or
the process of transmitting the data or
storing the data.
Duplicate data occurs when your data set
has data objects that are duplicates or
new duplicates of one another.
An example of this is when there
are two different records for
the same customer with
different addresses.
This can come about, for example,
if a customer's address has changed,
but the second address was simply
added to this customer's records instead
of used to update the first address.
Duplicate data can occur when
merging data from multiple sources.
Invalid or
inconsistent data occurs when you have
an impossible value for a variable.
Some common examples are when you have
a six digit zip code, the letters AB for
state abbreviations, or
a negative numbers for age.
These invalid data values can
come about when there is a data
entry error during data collection.
For example, if you allow people
to type in their zip code and
someone accidentally includes an extra
digit to their five digit zip code,
then you will end up with
an invalid six digit zipcode.
Noise refers to anything
that can distort your data.
Noise can be introduced during
the data collection process or
data transmission process.
An example is buzzing in the background
when an audio message is recorded
due to background noise or
a faulty microphone.
Another example is an overly bright
image due to an incorrect light
exposure setting.
An Outlier is a data sample with
values that are considerably different
than the rest of the other
data samples in a data set.
An example scenario, that can create
Outliers is when there's a sense of
failure that causes values being recorded
to be much higher or lower than normal.
In this case, you want to remove
the Outliers from your data.
In other applications however,
such as fraud detection,
outliers are the important samples
that should be examined more closely.
So depending on the application,
outliers may need to be removed or
be kept for further analysis.
If you simply ignore these
data quality issues,
any analysis that is performed
will produce misleading results.
In addition, some implementations
of analysis techniques
cannot handle some of these
problems such as missing values.
So, problems that we've discussed
in this lecture need to be
addressed before any meaningful
analysis can be performed.
We will discuss some techniques for
handling data quality
issues in the next lecture.